---
title: 'Freedom to Tweet'
date: 2016-05-15
permalink: /posts/2016/05/blog-tweet/
tags:
  - Nepal
---


In April 2006, an American physician, Dr. Brian Cobb and a team of doctors were treating people injured in the streets of Kathmandu when the state was trying to brutally repress the people’s uprising.  Those were the tumultuous days in Nepal’s history, people showing unprecedented courage and commitment to overthrow the monarchy to collectively usher into an age of republicanism, democracy and inclusion. In one day, police raided Cobb’s makeshift clinic, beat up the patients, and a couple of days later, Gyanendra’s government deported him to Bangladesh where he was based.  Going back in the time, the whole Panchayat project tried to clamp down on any activity that the rulers deemed anti-national, and as a result, both citizens and aliens were victimized. Cornell anthropologist Dr. David Holmberg, who was pursuing his doctoral research in Nepal at that time has written about how he was ordered to leave the country by Royal regime in the year  1977 because of a difference in ideology between his field assistant and a royalist rival in the village. Although the specifics and contexts of each incident differ, Nepal government’s recent move of expelling a Canadian citizen, Mr. Robert Penner for his tweets represents yet another incidence of state agencies acting on whims, guided by the sense of brute-power to encroach upon the domain of individual liberty. 

Setting the Context
As anyone following Mr. Robert Penner on twitter can note, he tweets extensively on Nepali politics. Ironically, the first complaint about him to Nepal Police and Prime Minister’s office was by no other but a controversial figure in Nepal’s Human Rights sector, Mr. Subodh Raj Pyakurel, who is said to have good personal ties with Prime Minister Oli. Mr. Pyakurel’s complaint was a result of his deep personal discomfort because of the repeated questions Mr. Penner posed him about the Human Rights Watch (HRW) Report on Nepal, published last September. As Penner would show in his  painstaking piece, Mr. Pyakurel’s allegations against that report were factually incorrect. Two more complaints were later filed against Penner by people who often spew vitriol in social media hiding under anonymity (now their accounts are taken down). In a clearly amateur social media handling by government, the complaints were entertained by Hello Sarkar team run by the office of prime minister. Department of Immigration ordered the arrest of 38-year old computer scientist from his residence, revoking his valid work visa and forcing him to leave the country when court hearing was still underway in the Supreme Court.



Divided Opinion
Just as the Nepali public sphere is divided in every other issue, public opinion is divided on whether he should have been deported.  There are people who believe that the decision to deport based on harmless but political tweets violates the freedom of expression. They hold that deporting someone based on his or her political viewpoints is against the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, of which is Nepal is signatory. I myself belong to this camp.

Those who think he should have been deported are often propagating the conspiracy theories that he was doing some illegal activities, or he had changed his employer, or he had violated certain immigration laws.  But the fact is that the Department of Immigration categorically mentioned ‘social media posts’ as the only reason of his deportation in his visa revocation letter. 

Another attempt of a herd of people in social media is to paint his image as an ‘internet troll and harasser’.  For example, in an article  published by My Republica, Ms. Shiwani Neupane accused him of being ‘troll’ as many as thirty times without defining what constitutes a troll. I can understand her annoyance because she had been making several inconsistent points in twitter, and Mr. Penner would catch her lie every single time. For example, Ms. Neupane says the Human Rights Watch report is ‘a very good report’, and then says information on ‘lynching of Policeman [Thaman Bishwokarma] was contained only in the footnote, not in main report. But when someone sends the screenshot of that information in main body of report, she would say ‘it’s not the report she read. To be fair, it’s may be a kind of nitty-gritty fact-checking and might be annoying especially when one loves to be unquestioned, but that certainly doesn’t make you a troll or harasser. It’s a human nature that one’s bias can lead us to wrong assessment and whenever one finds himself in wrong position, it would be an honest step to stand corrected, instead of playing victim. That op-ed, more appallingly, is accusatory, that blames him for a fake facebook page of her—which has been taken down now—without any evidence.  


He has also been portrayed as someone ‘a leftist, bolstering Madhesis’, who is ‘ratcheting-up’ the divide between Hill and Madhesi community.  And this is probably the chief reason behind complains, successive persecution and ongoing efforts aimed at defaming him in certain quarters of opinion-makers. I am not aware if any of the political hat fits to him but based on his tweets, he was certainly not a fan of violent tactics employed by Madhes based parties during several months-long protest after promulgation of new constitution, and contrary to self-proclaimed liberals would have us to believe, he was an opponent of Indian blockade. It is worthwhile to remember here that he along with Ravi Nepal and David Caprara went on to Janakpur, started a campaign on #OpenMadhesShools. The growing public pressures ultimately forced the United Democratic Madhesi Democratic Front to let classes resume. 
Despite his position of anti-violence and anti-Indian Blockade, he was still perceived as someone ‘unnecessarily provoking Madhesis’. The reason was a vocal Kathmandu commentators had already painted the HRW report as a biased, pro-Madhesi or even pro-India and anyone doing a fact-checking on accusations of report would be a defender of that report, and by extension, pro-Madhesi. Now his image is pro-Madhesi, it’s easier for the state to book him on the charge of violating social discord, even if there exists no evidence to prove so, because the current Oli government has always peddled the broad narrative that Madhesis are promoting ethnic conflict and are a threat to national integration. 

Beyond Penner

Let’s make no mistake. This issue is not about Robert Penner.  It’s about growing intolerance of Nepali state that encroaches the right to free speech we are entitled to as a citizen or an alien. It’s about deteriorating human rights situation of the country, and it’s about whether we can speak up for ourselves when government tries to silence its critics. 
Nepal already has a history of restricting activities of Tibetan refugees that transcends to curbing individual freedom of expression, often portraying geo-political quagmire as the excuse. Nepali state has also been intolerant to its own people. For instance, women’s right to confer citizenship to her children in her name has been restricted; the summary imprisonment of people of particular cultural community were common until recently, arbitrary detention and excessive use of force against people, and particularly so for the people of some ethnic set-up is a norm rather than an exception. There have been fresh state-led attempts to intimidate or silence people who speak for Human Rights, justice and equality: Prime Minister Oli’s harangue to Nepal Human Rights Commission team, particularly to its spokesperson Mohna Ansari in Early April is a case in point, that provides a clue on which way Oli government is heading, if there is not enough public pressure to change its course. The Penner episode only exposed the growing intolerance of Nepali state.  The more important question is: do we want to live in a state that respects the right of an individual to hold political views and express them without fear, and do we feel it as a responsibility to speak up when there is clear indication of shrinking democratic space? I am not certain about the answer but how vocally we support Penner’s freedom provides a good proxy. 

(Mr. Acharya is a graduate student at Louisiana State University, USA.)


Published in Setopati (2016-05-16)
